docs: migrate Ernst's README webpage into the repo, updated for v21 (#113)
tdulcet/Mlucas: README.md

* [Manual method](#manual-method)
  * [Download](#download)
  * [Installing GMP and HWLOC](#installing-gmp-and-hwloc)
  * [Build](#build)
  * [Common Build Issues and Workarounds](#common-build-issues-and-workarounds)
* [Basic build self-test](#basic-build-self-test)
* [Performance tuning](#performance-tuning)
* [Getting exponents from PrimeNet](#getting-exponents-from-primenet)
* [Sending results to PrimeNet](#sending-results-to-primenet)
* [Savefile format](#savefile-format)
* [Tracking your contribution](#tracking-your-contribution)
* [Further documentation](#further-documentation)

## Prerequisites

Dependencies:
* Make
* GNU C or Clang compiler
* \*GNU Multiple Precision (GMP) library
* \*Portable Hardware Locality (hwloc) library
* \*Python 3 (only needed to run [AutoPrimeNet](https://github.com/tdulcet/AutoPrimeNet))

\* Optional

Use `which <tool>` (e.g. `which gcc`, `which gdb`) to check whether a given piece is already installed; most Linux distributions and macOS releases already include Make and a C compiler. `gdb` is a nice-to-have if you ever need to debug a crash (see [Common Build Issues](#common-build-issues-and-workarounds)).

> GMP is used to take the GCDs that extract factors from P-1 residues; build without it (`no_gmp`, see [Build](#build)) and P-1 factoring still runs, but won't identify factors it finds. HWLOC is recommended starting with v21: it lets Mlucas resolve physical-core/thread topology itself via the new `-core` flag, removing the need to know your CPU vendor's logical-core numbering scheme (see [Basic build self-test](#basic-build-self-test)).

Reviewer: I believe hwloc is canonically spelled all lowercase. This also occurs many times below.

3. If one has git installed, just run: `git clone https://github.com/primesearch/Mlucas.git`. Otherwise, download the latest archive: `wget https://github.com/primesearch/Mlucas/archive/main.tar.gz` and then decompress the files: `tar -xzvf main.tar.gz`.
4. To download AutoPrimeNet, run: `wget -nv https://raw.github.com/tdulcet/AutoPrimeNet/main/autoprimenet.py`.

### Installing GMP and HWLOC

If your package manager doesn't have `libgmp-dev`/`gmp-devel`/`hwloc` packages (see the OS-specific commands above), or you need a newer version than your distro ships:

**GMP** (mandatory for P-1 factor extraction): download the current `.tar.xz` from [gmplib.org](https://gmplib.org/), then:
```
tar xJf gmp-*.tar.xz
cd gmp-<version>
./configure
make
make check
make install   # re-run with sudo if you get a 'permission denied' error
```

> **HWLOC** (recommended since v21, for the `-core` affinity flag and for visualizing hardware topology, especially on manycore and hybrid big.LITTLE-style processors): most distros package it as `hwloc`/`libhwloc-dev`/`hwloc-devel`. If your package manager can't find the header, look for a `-dev`/`-devel` variant of the package (e.g. Ubuntu's runtime `hwloc` package is separate from the `libhwloc-dev` package that provides `hwloc.h`). Once installed, the `lstopo` command-line tool (occasionally packaged as `lstopo-no-graphics`) can render your machine's topology, e.g. `lstopo my_machine.svg`, which is useful when choosing `-core`/`-cpu` arguments by hand.

Reviewer: Maybe put this in a `<summary>`/`<details>` element, to hide it by default. Almost all package managers should include the GMP and hwloc libraries, as listed in the Download section above.

### Build

1. Change into the `Mlucas` directory. Run: `cd Mlucas` or `cd Mlucas-main` depending on which method one used to download it.
2. Run:
	* To build Mlucas: `bash makemake.sh [SIMD mode] [use_hwloc] [no_gmp]`.

> 	* To build Mfactor: `bash makemake.sh mfac [word]`, where `word` is optionally one of `1word`, `2word`, `3word`, `4word` or `nword`.

Reviewer: I believe Mfactor also has the `[SIMD mode]` and `[no_gmp]` options. I would also suggest adding a small table to explain which exponents and bit levels each of those `[word]` options supports. For example, see the PDF attached to [this forum post](https://www.mersenneforum.org/node/20095#post20095).

> 	(The bracketed arguments above are all optional and order-independent — mix and match as needed, e.g. `bash makemake.sh mfac avx2 2word`.)

Reviewer: The bracketed arguments are also case insensitive.

> By default `makemake.sh` auto-detects the highest SIMD mode your build host supports (AVX-512, AVX2, AVX, SSE2 on x86_64; ASIMD on Armv8) by probing `/proc/cpuinfo` on Linux, `sysctl` on macOS, or compiling a small feature-detection program on other platforms, and falls back to a scalar-double build if none is recognized. To cross-compile or target a different mode than the host's, pass one of `avx512`, `avx2`, `avx`, `sse2` (x86_64), `asimd` (Armv8), `k1om` (first-generation Xeon Phi/Knights Corner), or `nosimd` explicitly as the first argument, e.g. `bash makemake.sh avx2`. Add `use_hwloc` to link against libhwloc and enable the `-core` flag, or `no_gmp` to build without linking GMP (P-1 factoring will then run, but skip taking GCDs to extract factors from the resulting residue).

Reviewer: Maybe mention that for maximum performance, users should not manually specify a SIMD build mode. Only specify a SIMD build mode when cross-compiling.

Each explicit SIMD mode gets its own object directory (the binary itself is still just named `Mlucas`), e.g. `bash makemake.sh avx2` builds `obj_avx2/Mlucas`; letting the script auto-detect (a plain `bash makemake.sh`) builds `obj/Mlucas`. This lets you keep binaries for multiple SIMD modes side by side without them overwriting each other.

To build with Clang or another GCC-compatible compiler instead of the default GCC, run `export CC=<compiler>` (e.g. `export CC=clang`) before invoking `makemake.sh`. To switch compilers on an already-built tree without a full rebuild, run `make clean` inside the `obj` directory, then `CC=<compiler> make -j "$(nproc)"`.

### Common Build Issues and Workarounds

> * **Where to look first:** if `makemake.sh` reports errors, check the `build.log` file it writes inside the object directory (`obj`, `obj_avx2`, etc.) for the (case-insensitive) string "error".

Reviewer: Maybe provide an example grep command here: `grep -i -C 3 'error' build.log`

* **Debug symbols:** builds include `-g` by default so that a crash can be diagnosed with `gdb -ex=r ./Mlucas` (gives you the file, line number and stack trace). If you want a smaller binary afterward, run `strip -g Mlucas`.

> * **Benign warnings:** `build.log` will typically contain compiler warnings about type-punned pointers, signed/unsigned comparisons, and unused variables — these come from the quad-float emulation and inline-assembly code and are expected; they are not build failures.

Reviewer: The warnings come from a LOT more areas than just those two. However, maybe remove this bullet now that most of those warnings are being resolved in #34.

* **`cc: command not found` (some WSL installs):** `export CC=gcc` before retrying `bash makemake.sh`.

> * **ARM/Apple Silicon SIMD detection:** `makemake.sh` probes for `-march=native`/`-mcpu=native` support before relying on it in the ASIMD fallback path, so most Clang-on-Arm toolchains are now handled automatically. If you still hit a runtime segfault or an "unsupported architecture" compiler error on an unusual ARM target, pass the closest matching mode explicitly (`bash makemake.sh asimd` or `bash makemake.sh nosimd`), or add an explicit `-march=<version>` for your CPU to your compiler flags.

Reviewer: If the `makemake.sh` script fails to detect the supported SIMD build mode, users should report the bug.

> * **Rebuilding after a source update:** run `make clean` in the relevant `obj*` directory (or `rm -f obj*/*.o` from the top-level directory) before re-running `makemake.sh`, since Make does not always detect stale header-file dependents. Parallel builds are fast, so a full rebuild is usually the safe and quick choice.

Reviewer: Users would also need to rerun the self-tests after an upgrade, especially if there was a version bump.

> If you get stuck, please [open an issue](https://github.com/primesearch/Mlucas/issues) with your `build.log`, compiler version and platform details.

Reviewer: To get support, users should preferably post to the Mlucas subforum of the Mersenne Forum, as many more people are on the forum and they would likely get help much faster. GitHub is for bug reports and feature requests.

## Basic build self-test

Once you have a linked binary, try a quick spot-check at a small FFT length:
```
./Mlucas -fft 192 -iters 100 -radset 0
```
Look for a line reading `INFO: System has [X] available processor cores.` — this is the number of *logical* (virtual) cores; if it's double your physical core count, your CPU supports hyperthreading (or SMT). This particular test case has an internally-tabulated 100-iteration reference residue, so a mismatch means something is wrong with the build (compiler miscompilation, hardware issue, etc.) and will produce a loud error message.

If that works, retry multithreaded:
```
./Mlucas -fft 192 -iters 100 -radset 0 -nthread 2

> ```

Reviewer: I would suggest removing this section. The `-nthread` option is deprecated in favor of `-cpu`, which is in turn no longer recommended in favor of `-core`.

* **`-nthread {int}`** — deprecated; equivalent to `-cpu 0:{int-1}`. Kept for backward compatibility only.

For a complete option reference (all self-test tiers, P-1 flags, `mlucas.ini` options, etc.), see [help.txt](help.txt).

## Performance tuning

After a successful basic self-test, run one of the following self-test tiers to build a `mlucas.cfg` file of optimal per-FFT-length radix sets and timings for your hardware. Run these under unloaded or constant-load conditions for the most reliable data:

```
./Mlucas -s m [-core or -cpu flags] >& test.log
```

> `-s m` ("medium") covers the FFT-length range most GIMPS assignments currently fall into and is the tier ordinary users are recommended to run (roughly an hour on a fast CPU). Other tiers — `-s t`(iny), `-s s`(mall), `-s l`(arge), `-s a`(ll), `-s h`(uge), `-s e`(gregious) — cover progressively larger FFT-length ranges; see [help.txt](help.txt) section `[1]` for exact ranges and expected runtimes.

Reviewer: It depends on the number of threads and iterations, but the medium self-test usually takes much less than an hour on modern systems (likely less than 15 minutes). See #38.

Once `mlucas.cfg` exists, Mlucas reads it at startup to pick the best radix set for whatever exponent it's assigned. If you plan to run multiple simultaneous instances (recommended on 4+ core systems, generally 2-4 physical cores per instance), copy `mlucas.cfg` into one run directory per instance, and give each instance a disjoint `-core`/`-cpu` range and its own `worktodo.txt`/`results.txt`. A minimal example on a hwloc build with an 8-physical-core CPU, running two 4-core instances:
```
mkdir run0 run1

> cp obj/mlucas.cfg run0/ && cp obj/mlucas.cfg run1/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ln -s obj/mlucas.cfg run0/ run1/
```

cd run0 && nohup ../obj/Mlucas -maxalloc 50 -core 0:3 &
cd ../run1 && nohup ../obj/Mlucas -maxalloc 50 -core 4:7 &
```
`-maxalloc {+int}` caps the percentage of free system RAM a given instance's P-1 stage 2 may use (default 90%, 50% on macOS); when running several instances concurrently, lower this so their stage 2 memory needs don't collide.

Without hwloc, the correct `-cpu` ranges for hyperthreaded/SMT systems differ between Intel and AMD, and hybrid (big.LITTLE-style) and Apple Silicon systems need their own topology-specific reasoning. [docs/PERFORMANCE.md](docs/PERFORMANCE.md) has a full set of worked `-cpu` examples for those cases, plus a template for a `jobs.sh` boot-time launch script.

## Getting exponents from PrimeNet

> The recommended way to fetch and manage GIMPS assignments is [AutoPrimeNet](https://github.com/tdulcet/AutoPrimeNet), the actively-maintained successor to the `primenet.py` script that used to ship with Mlucas. It registers your machine, requests work of your preferred type, and writes/tops-up the `worktodo.txt` file in each run directory you point it at (`--dir`/`-D`, one per Mlucas instance), reading Mlucas's own progress/checkpoint files to know when to submit results and fetch more work. See its README for full usage (`--username`/`-u`, `--mlucas`/`-m` to select the Mlucas client, `--timeout`/`-t` for the polling interval, `-t 0` for a single-shot run).

Reviewer: Note that it is recommend to use AutoPrimeNet's `--setup` option to configure it (which would prompt for all of the needed settings), instead these command line options.

> If you'd rather manage assignments by hand via the [PrimeNet manual testing pages](https://www.mersenne.org/), create a PrimeNet account, check out exponents from the [Manual Test Assignments](https://www.mersenne.org/manual_assignment/) page, then paste the returned assignment lines directly into `worktodo.txt` (one directory per Mlucas instance; **note that Mlucas v21's workfile is named `worktodo.txt`, not the old `worktodo.ini`** — rename any pre-v21 workfile before starting a v21 build). Mlucas supports these assignment line formats:

Reviewer: I would suggest removing this first sentence, or hide it by default. The legacy manual testing/assignment pages are deprecated and should no longer be used with Mlucas. The same in the "Sending results to PrimeNet" section below.

```
Test={aid},{exponent},{TF bits},{P-1 done? 0|1}                                   # LL, first-time or double-check
DoubleCheck={aid},{exponent},{TF bits},{P-1 done? 0|1}
PRP={aid},1,2,{exponent},-1,{TF bits},{ignore}                                    # PRP, first-time
PRP={aid},1,2,{exponent},-1,{TF bits},{ignore},{base},{residue type}              # PRP double-check
Pminus1=[aid,]1,2,{exponent},-1,{B1},{B2}[,{TF bits}][,{B2 start}][,"{known factors}"]

> Pfactor=[aid,]1,2,{exponent},-1,{TF bits},{LL/PRP tests saved if factor found}

Reviewer: The AID is optional for all work types. The `c` value is not -1 for Fermat numbers. The `ignore` value for PRP tests is the number of tests saved if a factor is found, which I believe it not actually ignored.

I would suggest verifying these formats match what is accepted by Mlucas and Prime95/MPrime (and thus the PrimeNet server).

* P-1 stage 2 uses a single `p{exponent}.s2` savefile, plus a `p{exponent}.s1_prod` file caching the precomputed stage 1 prime-powers product (useful for restarting large-B1 runs without recomputing it).
* LL/PRP runs also snapshot a persistent savefile every 10M iterations (`.10M`, `.20M`, ...), allowing a partial rerun of a suspect range without restarting from scratch.

**Interrupting a run safely:** Mlucas listens for `SIGINT` (Ctrl-C) and `SIGTERM` (the default `kill` signal) and, for LL, PRP, and P-1 stage 1 work, will finish the current iteration, write savefiles, and exit cleanly. P-1 stage 2's state is more complex and does *not* currently have a clean-exit path — interrupting stage 2 loses any work since the last stage 2 savefile write. `killall -STOP Mlucas` / `killall -CONT Mlucas` will suspend/resume all running instances without losing anything. As a last resort for an unresponsive instance, `kill -9 {pid}` terminates immediately (and loses any not-yet-checkpointed work).

## Tracking your contribution

> You can track your overall progress (both automated and manually-submitted work) on the [PrimeNet server's producer page](https://www.mersenne.org/report_top_500/) once you're registered. Note this does not include any pre-v5-PrimeNet-server manual test results.

Reviewer: I would suggest removing this section, as it is not Mlucas specific.

## Further documentation

* [help.txt](help.txt) — the full command-line option reference (self-test tiers, P-1 flags, `mlucas.ini` options, savefile internals, and more).
* [docs/PERFORMANCE.md](docs/PERFORMANCE.md) — worked `-cpu`/`-core` examples for hyperthreaded Intel/AMD, ARM, hybrid, and Apple Silicon systems, plus multi-instance launch-script templates.
* [docs/Fermat-testing.md](docs/Fermat-testing.md) — testing Fermat numbers with Mlucas.
* [docs/ANDROID.md](docs/ANDROID.md) — running Mlucas on a cluster of Android phones.

> * [docs/ARCHITECTURE.md](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md) — how Mlucas's FFT/DWT-based modular squaring works internally (the algorithmic Q&A formerly on the mersenneforum.org README page).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [docs/ARCHITECTURE.md](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md) — how Mlucas's FFT/DWT-based modular squaring works internally (the algorithmic Q&A formerly on the Ernst's README webpage).
```
